---
title: 2018
image:
image_small:
excerpt: "Goal tracking for 2018"
---

*Note: to see how I've revised my goals through the year, check out the [git revision history for this page](https://github.com/christiangenco/christiangenco.github.io/commits/master/_posts/2018-01-01-2018.md)*

My goal for 2018 is to **work for 2,080 <abbr title="pomodoro: 25 minutes of focused work followed by a 5 minute break">poms</abbr>**. This breaks down into 40 poms a week, or 8 poms every weekday.

Each pom I work on in 2018 should be spent to either:

* `#learn` something (ex: a new technical skill, a language, a nonfiction book)
* `#build` something (ex: an app, a new feature, a blog post, or an [Ebomb](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ih-SPXvC1io))
* `#keep` on top of administrative tasks (ex: inbox 0, gtd tasks)

For goals to be [SMART](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SMART_criteria), they must be measurable, so I made [an app to track my pomodoro progress](http://poms.gen.co/cgenco). This has made it way easier to stay on track.

---

## Sunday Review

To keep the wheels greased of this productivity machine, every Sunday I'll set aside one pom to:

* update this page with my weekly review
* identify one **bad habit** to stop doing
* identify one distraction to **automate**
* identify one task to **delegate**

---

## Month 01: January

* Book Outline: *[Relationships](/books/relationships)* ✅
* Course Outline: [Redux](/redux), [React Redux](/react-redux), [Firestore](/firestore), [React Redux Firestore Application Scaffold](/react-redux-firestore) ✅
* Project 1: [Apricot Book](https://apricotbook.com) facebook messenger integration ✅
* Project 2: [Pom Tracker](https://poms.gen.co) live updates graphs of my poms ✅
* Project 3: ❌

### Week 01: set 2018 goals ✅, get current on admin work (email, gtd, groove) ✅, publish [outline of *Relationships*](/books/relationships) ❌

1. **2018-01-01**: [gen.co/2018](http://gen.co/2018) (2/2), automate payroll and rent (4/4), inbox 0+gtd (2/2) = 8 ✅
2. **2018-01-02**: automate payroll and rent (1/1), inbox 0+gtd (4/4), Relationships outline (3/3) = 8 ✅
3. **2018-01-03**: inbox 0+gtd (5/5), Relationships outline (0/3) = 5
4. **2018-01-04**: Lola audio project (1/1), inbox 0+gtd (3/4), Relationships outline (0/3) = 4
5. **2018-01-05**: twilio config (2/2), inbox 0+gtd (4/5), investigating family drama, Relationships outline (0/1) = 6
6. **2018-01-06**: investigating family drama, inbox 0+gtd (3/3) = 3
7. **2018-01-07**: gtd (4/4), Relationships outline (2/4) = 6

40 - 8 - 8 - 5 - 4 - 6 - 3 - 6 = 0 ✅

Notes: first week doing my fresh new 2018 productivity system and I did 40 poms! Huge success there, even with two unexpected family emergencies that ate up a lot of time. Next week I'd like to go over 40 poms to bank up some time for the 7-day Denver ski trip I'm taking from the 21st to the 28th. Working 8 poms a day, I could bank up 32 extra poms before the trip and only need to squeeze 8 poms over the entire week (~1/day). My "Relationships" outline is two chapters short of publishing, so I'll finish that up next week.

### Week 02: [Apricot Book](https://apricotbook.com) facebook messenger integration ❌, 10 gtd poms that improve my tools ✅, publish [outline of *Relationships*](/books/relationships) ✅

1. **2018-01-08**: Relationships outline (3/3), gtd tools (3/3), Apricot Book (2/2) = 8 ✅
2. **2018-01-09**: gtd tools (2/2), Apricot Book (6/6) = 8 ✅
3. **2018-01-10**: gtd tools (2/2), gtd (3/3), Apricot Book (3/3) = 8 ✅
4. **2018-01-11**: gtd tools (2/2), learn redux (6/6) = 8 ✅
5. **2018-01-12**: learn redux (6/6), gtd tools (1/1), gtd (1/1) = 8 ✅
6. **2018-01-13**: learn redux (6/5), gtd (2/3) = 8 ✅
7. **2018-01-14**: gtd (4/4), firestore blog post (4/4) = 8 ✅

40 + 16 - 8 - 8 - 8 - 8 - 8 - 8 - 8 = 0 ✅

Notes: Wow - a perfect week. 16 poms banked for my ski trip! I started this week wanting to push out a feature for an app, but two days in I realized my time would be much better spent going back and learning the fundamentals of the frameworks I wanted to work with: redux and firestore. I pivoted and wrote guides on those technologies instead of building stuff and I think it was a great decision: I have a much better fundamental understanding of what these tools do and how to use them, and I published several guides on them, which satisfies another yearly goal. "Give me six hours to chop down a tree and I will spend the first four sharpening the axe." I like the progress I'm making just learning these technologies at a deeper level, so I'll continue that next week and delay the Apricot Book improvement.

### Week 03: Redux and Firebase App Guides ✅, Outline Firebase and React and Redux courses ✅, 10 poms dealing with old laptops and hard drives ❌

1. **2018-01-15**: Firebase guides (4/4), firebase redux classes (4/3), gtd (0/1) = 8 ✅
2. **2018-01-16**: Firebase guides (4/4), gtd (2/2), laptops (2/2) = 8 ✅
3. **2018-01-17**: research offline ski trip work (4/2), pom tracker (4/2), laptops (0/2) = 8 ✅
4. **2018-01-18**: pom tracker (3/3), react udemy (2/2), gtd (3/2), laptops (0/1) = 8 ✅
5. **2018-01-19**: packing (3/3), *dropped off laptop* = 3
6. **2018-01-20**: react 16 course (8/8), *Celeste* = 8 ✅
7. **2018-01-21**: *Something Rotten!*, *Denver*, react BDD course (2/0) = 2

40 + 8 - 8 - 8 - 8 - 8 - 3 - 8 - 2 = 3 ❌

Notes: Super good week. Banked away an extra 5 poms for the ski trip, and adapted pretty well to not having my laptop for the last three days. iPads are pretty good work tools! Now that I have that set up, it'll be much easier in the future to transition to only using my iPad. I doubled down this week in learning React from online courses and I'm loving it - it's giving me a better fundamental understanding of the tools I'm using to build things I love which makes it much easier to build things.

### Week 04: *ski better* ✅

1. **2018-01-22**: *ski prep in Denver*
2. **2018-01-23**: *skiing*
3. **2018-01-24**: *skiing*
4. **2018-01-25**: *skiing*
5. **2018-01-26**: *ski rest day*, [react BDD course](http://ude.my/UC-Z0EC6UST) (7/0)
6. **2018-01-27**: *skiing*, *night skiing*
7. **2018-01-28**: *travel back to Dallas*

Notes: I got significantly better at skiing this trip. The technique I learned as a kid is wrong (learning far back and putting 90% of your weight on your downhill foot vs. leaning forward and having your weight 50% on each foot) and I was able to correct a lot of it this trip. It was a freaking blast, but I actually missed working, and should've taken a rest day earlier. Three days of skiing in a row is too much. The day after my rest day was the best ski day I had on the trip. Traveling with an iPad is easier than with a laptop (it's lighter and needs to be charged less frequently) and I learned a lot about being productive on it. It helps that most of my work right now is taking notes on video lectures, though the iPad can't speed through the videos as fast as my laptop can because of stupid software limitations. It was a blast cooking and doing crosswords in a ski lodge right off the slope with Luke, Tori, Eli, Ben, and Li. I'm happy with the amount of work I got done.

### January Notes

Wow! This new productivity system is my best so far. Setting goals at different levels (yearly, monthly, weekly, and daily) is incredibly clarifying and inspiring. I *want* to get work done to get the monkey points of updating my work log.

I didn't get three project goals done, but published way more course outlines than I thought I was going to. I think this yearly goal may need to be readjusted for my new focus on sharpening my toolkit.

---

## Month 02: February

* Book Outline: A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy
* Course Outline: [React - Mastering Test and Behavior Driven Development](#), [React 16 - The Complete Guide](#)
* Project 1:
* Project 2:
* Project 3:

### Week 05: publish React TDD outline ❌, get current on admin work (email, gtd, taxes, physical inboxes) ❌, React 16 - The Complete Guide outline ❌, start 30x500 ✅

1. **2018-01-29**: gtd (4/4), trigg magic (1/0), email (3/3) = 8 ✅
2. **2018-01-30**: React 16 (4/4), 30x500 (3/3), *trigg magic*, email (1/1) = 8 ✅
3. **2018-01-31**: 30x500 (4/4), React 16 (2/3), email (0/1) = 6 ❌
4. **2018-02-01**: React 16 (3/3), email (2/1), *loan arbitration*, 30x500 (0/4) = 5 ❌
5. **2018-02-02**: React 16 (3/3), gtd (2/2), 30x500 (3/3) = 8 ✅
6. **2018-02-03**: React 16 (3/3), gtd (3/3), 30x500 (2/2) = 8 ✅
7. **2018-02-04**: 30x500 (0/4), gtd (0/4) = 0 ❌

40 - 8 - 8 - 6 - 5 - 8 - 8 - 0 = -3 ✅

#### Review

* **Bad habit**: exercise instead of eating when bored or stuck, spend less than 10m on break between poms, do work exclusively in poms
* **Automate distractions**: looking for glasses and phone, watching Starcraft videos on Youtube before poms are done, `gatd` terminal command, morning routine
* **Delegate**: identify a cleaning service to use

#### Notes

This week it became clear that I need to update my yearly goals. Originally, I'd wanted to push forward projects that I felt had been stagnating forever (Apricot Book, Fileinbox, mailto, etc.) by forcing myself to put more development work into them. What I've found is that just by coercing myself to sit down and do the work of 40 poms a week, I've been gravitating towards filling in gaps in my knowledge in technical and business skills. Retrospectively, I think this is clearly a better use of my time, because by increasing my skillset I can 1) be much more productive in the original technical goals I had, 2) get an obvious next step in the work I'm doing (either the next lesson in a course, or the next course in a topic), and 3) practice digesting the information I take in for others. The last point will, I think, be especially useful for practicing my business skills, since digested information is an easy product to give to a 30x500 audience.

This week I also failed to catch up on administrative tasks. I think this is a great target for further delegation, and I also need to spend more time on it. Taking courses is great work that I enjoy, but it shouldn't cause me to ignore my weekly goal. I think it would also help if I set clearer administrative goals. "Get current on admin work" isn't super clear.

## Week 06: 10 poms on @30x500 ❌, 10 poms on @react16 ❌, get all 2017 transactions in QuickBooks @taxes ✅

1. **2018-02-05**: @poms (1/1), @react16 (3/3), @30x500 (4/4) = 8 ✅
2. **2018-02-06**: @taxes (3/3), @30x500 (3/3), @react16 (2/2) = 8 ✅
3. **2018-02-07**: *Travel to St. Louis*, *St. Louis with Daisy June*
4. **2018-02-08**: *St. Louis with Daisy June* = 0
5. **2018-02-09**: *St. Louis with Daisy June*, @payroll (1/1) = 1
6. **2018-02-10**: *St. Louis with Daisy June*, @email (1/1) = 1
7. **2018-02-11**: *St. Louis with Daisy June*, @gtd (1/1), @react16 (1/1) = 2

Total: 20 ❌

Notes: Travel once again throws a wrench in my productivity. I got a lot done, just nothing that's on this list. Things like hanging out with relatives and reading Aladdin to a 4 year old at least thirty times. Being a father is going to be a blast. I also love adapting to other people's way of life - there's a lot of little details that you can pick up living with someone that would be impossible to get from them otherwise.

## Week 07: 30 poms

1. **2018-02-12**: *St. Louis with Daisy June*
2. **2018-02-13**: *St. Louis with Daisy June*
3. **2018-02-14**: *Travel back to Dallas*, @react16 (2/2) = 2
4. **2018-02-15**: @gtd (0/3), @30x500 (0/4), @react16 (0/3)
5. **2018-02-16**:
6. **2018-02-17**:
7. **2018-02-18**: *Travel to Mexico*

30 - 2

---

❌✅
