---
title: Big Five Aspects Personality Scale
image: https://i.imgur.com/Cluv50i.jpg
image_small: https://i.imgur.com/Cluv50im.jpg
excerpt: "It's not me - I just have a rude personality."
---

I've recently been devouring every piece of media [Jordan Peterson](https://jordanbpeterson.com/) has ever produced.

One of these pieces - interestingly - is [a personality test](https://www.understandmyself.com/) that Peterson developed with Dr. Colin DeYoung and Dr. Lena Quality.

I'm continually interested in understanding humans better, so I took his test to see another angle of how my own biases are coloring my assumptions of other people. I like that it doesn't fall for the N-types-of-people fallacy: each attribute is given a statistical percentile instead of lumping me into a tidy group ("you're a [questioner](https://gretchenrubin.com/2017/06/questioners-video/)! an [ENTJ](https://www.16personalities.com/entj-personality)! a [Ravenclaw](http://sortinghatchats.tumblr.com/post/93714122718/our-favorite-game-basic-sorting-system)!").

Below are my notes from my results.

---

### Plasticity: flexible, exploratory, curious, quick to adapt

* **Extraversion** (outgoing vs. reserved): sociable, active, adventurousness, positive, excitement-seeking, gregarious, dominant, **vs.** impulsive, isolated, depressed
* **Openness** (original vs. traditional): fantasy-prone, aesthetically-minded, philosophical, creative, intuitive, intellectual, scattered, overwhelmed by ideas **vs** narrow, inflexible

### Stability: structured, organized, emotionally stable, focused

* **Conscientiousness** (conscientious vs. carefree): competent, orderly, dicisive, achievement-oriented, self-disciplined, deliberate, industrious, obsessive about order, judgemental, rigid, **vs** carefree, messy, undisciplined, careless
* **Emotional Stability** (calm vs. nervous): risky, dangerous, **vs.** anxious, angry, hostile, depressed, self-conscious, vulnerable
* **Agreeableness** (agreeable vs. assertive/aggressive): warm, trusting, straightforward, alturistic, modest, compliant, tender-minded, nice, never stand up for themselves **vs.** aggressive, callous, bullying

Increase with age: agreeableness, conscientiousness, emotional stability (like a kind old grandfather)

---

## 1. ❌Agreeableness (15th%): 🔹Compassion (55th%) and ❌Politeness (2nd%)

I'm somewhat concerned with helping others avoid negative emotion (more so than typical males), but am not swayed by them being upset.

I choose to be skeptical and straightforward at the cost of not being nice. I prefer systems and machines over people.

## 2. ✅Conscientiousness (69th%): ✅Industriousness (85th%) and 🔹Orderliness (41st%)

I work hard to make useful plans, and work productively and focused to achieve them. I judge unsuccessful people as deserving of their failure.

I keep things reasonably tidy and ordered, and am not bothered by a little mess or unpredictability. I see lots of nuance in issues others see as black and white.

## 3. ✅Extraversion (82nd%): ✅Enthusiasm (75th%) and ✅Assertiveness (81st%)

I have high self-esteem, enthusiastically enjoy social situations, and like fun exciting activities.

I tend to influencially take charge.

## 4. ❌Neuroticism (4th%): ❌Withdrawl (4th%) and ❌Volatility (7th%)

I'm not sensitive to negative emotions. I'm comfortable taking calculated risks, don't dwell on mistakes, don't feel imposter syndrome, and feel generally satisfied.

When facing a "serious, sustained, complex problem," I can still feel anxious and unhappy, but I cope well and recover quickly.

I don't worry and don't feel anticipatory anxiety, even when facing actual danger.

My mood is predictably and stably good. Even if provoked, I remain calm.

## 5. ✅Openness to Experience (71st%): 🔹Openness (51st%) and ✅Intellect (82nd%)

I enjoy thinking about and solving abstract and complex problems, and I'm good at it. I'm curious about new information.

I enjoy change, even just for the sake of change. I can't tolerate repetitive tasks. I'd much rather create a new venture.

I experience boredom in stable, straightforward, traditional occuptations where the rules don't change. I'm better suited to complex changing environments.

I'm interested in, but not obsessed by, art. I enjoy creative outlets, but don't wither away without them.
