---
title: How to Paper Prototype an App Idea
image:
image_small:
excerpt:
---

Paper prototyping is the most valuable skill you can have in [making new things](/ideas).

When you start a project by clearly defining exactly what it will look like when it's finished, you make getting there much easier. It's much easier to do the work of "follow this recipe to make a cake that looks like this picture" than it is to "make something delicious" with no directions.

## How to paper prototype

If you can draw rectangles and letters, you have the skills to

start by drawing out what you'd like the finished project to look like.

Once you finish these first sketches, cross out anything that's not important to the core function of what you're building. For each thing on the screen, ask yourself "if this were gone, would this still be useful?" If the answer is yes, it's gone. Save it for a later version. If your sketches get messy, redraw them. Repeat this until there's nothing left that you can cross off while still getting value from the thing. You should be at less than 3 screens.

> But I can't draw!

If you can draw a rectangle and letters, you can draw product sketches. Here's what version 0.1 of Facebook could look like as a paper prototype:

ITUNES: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MxWTGBQE7zE

DRAWING OF FACEBOOK AS SKETCHES

Here's twitter:

DRAWING OF TWITTER AS SKETCHES

Here's Snapchat:

DRAWING OF SNAPCHAT AS SKETCHES

Get the idea?

By stripping down your idea to it's core, you're making it much easier to finish, which means you're much more likely to actually get it done. Strip it down to [version 0.1](https://sivers.org/infinity), or you'll get something impossible that will seem too big to ever actually finish.
