---
title: Wear Clothes that Fit
image:
image_small:
excerpt: ""
hide: true
---

Your output is determined by your internal state and your external environment. You need a guitar to play guitar, and a better guitar can make your guitar playing sound better. You need SCUBA gear to SCUBA dive, and your diving ability also depends on your training.

Huge movements in your external envonment are easy. Throw away all your stuff! Buy \$6k in SCUBA gear! Buy a whole new wardrobe!

This is like wearing clothes that are too big.

Movements in your internal environment are hard (though can sometimes happen quickly with revelations). It usually looks like lots of hard work practicing, reading books, developing skills.

Wear clothes that fit. If your external environment is holding you back, you're practicing not being limited by your external environment, but your output is less than it could be if you made a (comparitively) easy move of changing your external environment.

If your external environment is WAY ahead of your internal state, you'll be better off getting clothes that fit. You'll be more comfortable practicing driving with a shitty car than with a \$200k racecar.

Sometimes, with revelations, you'll drastically move your internal state. In these moments, it's important to change your external envonment to match or you'll get pulled back down. Ex: your doctor tells you to change your diet or you'll die. If you don't go home and throw away all your junk food, you'll get pulled down by your external state.

Sometimes you might want to practice wearing clothes that are too tight to practice pushing past your external limitations. Try negotiating with stupid glasses!
