---
title: What are you excited about?
image:
image_small:
excerpt:
---

The most interesting part of networking for me is getting the other person to talk about what they're excited about - what they're really into.

I used to try to steer the conversation to get there. Start conventionally ("what do you do? where are you from?") and try to latch onto a hint of a spark somewhere in their description ("I'm an accountant for Deloitte...started working on a project in bioinformatics that's kind of interesting") and probe deeper in that direction ("Oh? What kinds of things in bioinformatics?"), but that frequently leads to dead ends ("oh, I don't really understand it. It's for this company that..."). A lot of conversation is lost in the slog of prepared speeches they've given a million times.

I stumbled on a way to cheat: just ask, up front, what they're excited about. This has several benefits:

* if they're excited about the work they're doing, they'll talk about their work, so I'm not losing anything by not asking about work first
* it jumps right to the interesting part of the conversation
* if they hate their work, they don't have to talk about it; it's a free pass to jump right to their passion that they slog through work to pay for
* I think I came up with this question myself; every time I ask it, I get (what feels like) a genuine answer they come up with on the spot. I'm not asking a question to the abstract concept of this person, but to this person at this moment in time.

In practice, there are several variations I've been playing with, with different advantages:

* "What are you excited about?":
* "What are you excited about right now?":
* "What are you working on? What are you excited about?": if the environment we're in is exciting, this makes it clearer that I don't want a reflexive answer ("I'm excited about this party woo!")

"What are you working on" was my previous go-to question.
